Always Have a Plan

This is perhaps the most important rule. You must always have a plan, rather
than engaging in directionless activity.
By this point, you should understand that having a plan is always possible.
It’s true that if you haven’t already solved the problem in your head, then
you can’t have a plan for implementing a solution in code. That will come
later. Even at the beginning, though, you should have a plan for how you are
going to find the solution.
To be fair, the plan may require alteration somewhere along the journey,
or you may have to abandon your original plan and concoct another. Why,
then, is this rule so important? General Dwight D. Eisenhower was famous
for saying, “I have always found that plans are useless, but planning is indispensable.”
He meant that battles are so chaotic that it is impossible to predict
everything that could happen and have a predetermined response for every
outcome. In that sense, then, plans are useless on the battlefield (another
military leader, the Prussian Helmuth von Moltke, famously said that “no
plan survives first contact with the enemy”). But no army can succeed without
planning and organization. Through planning, a general learns what his
army’s capabilities are, how the different parts of the army work together,
and so on.
In the same way, you must always have a plan for solving a problem. It
may not survive first contact with the enemy—it may be discarded as soon as
you start to type code into your source editor—but you must have a plan.
Without a plan, you are simply hoping for a lucky break, the equivalent
of the randomly typing monkey producing one of the plays of Shakespeare.
Lucky breaks are uncommon, and those that occur may still require a plan.
Many people have heard the story of the discovery of penicillin: A researcher
named Alexander Fleming forgot to close a petri dish one night and in the
morning found that mold had inhibited the growth of the bacteria in the
dish. But Fleming was not sitting around waiting for a lucky break; he had
been experimenting in a thorough and controlled way and thus recognized
the importance of what he saw in the petri dish. (If I found mold growing on
something I left out the night before, this would not result in an important
contribution to science.)